[Music]
[Applause]
always seems strange to ask for
questions after something like that
but that's where we're at now
very much
so am i taking questions or is there
someone pointing out shall i do it yes
okay
all right thank you so much
thank you so much for this
passionate
for this passionate
defensive reason
for those of you for those of us who
are on your side
i'm just curious do you have any
forward-looking views on where we're
going full debate you know this whole
i mean what you've been going through
for the last few years every argument
you've had do you have any sort of
midterm to long-term view of where we're
going or if you don't that's fine yeah
well we're we're going in many
directions at once
you know and the question is is is the
fundamental trajectory downhill or
uphill and i would say that depends on
you
western society in particular what's
that western society yes yes no and and
and more globally i mean
i worked on the un secretary general's
report on sustainable development for
about two years and
read a very large number of texts on
environmental
problems and opportunities and economic
development and what happened to me was
that i got way more optimistic than i
was before i started reading those books
i mean so many things have happened in
the last
40 years that are so good you just can't
believe it i mean we've lifted more
people out of abject poverty in the last
15 years than in the entire course of
human history in terms of sheer numbers
of people you know when starvation
except for political reasons is now
pretty much absent across the world
there hasn't been any wars in the
western hemisphere for about a decade
that's really something you know and no
major wars plague us at the moment
that's that's quite something given that
there are seven billion of us and
there's only going to be nine billion by
all appearances it's going to peak out
at about 9 billion and my suspicions are
in 100 years one of the biggest problems
we'll face is that there's just not
enough people and you never hear that
but i really do believe it's likely to
be the case
and we can certainly carry 9 billion
people without doing the planet undo
environmental damage and people who
claim otherwise i think
well i think a lot of things about that
but one of the things i don't think is
that that's an accurate viewpoint
i mean we're doing far better than we
were 40 years ago feeding people and we
can certainly
pack in another 2 billion it turns out
that if you want to control population
though i wouldn't really recommend that
as an occupation um
all you have to do is educate women and
that's the end of that problem then you
also have educated women and we know
that's very annoying but it seems to be
seems to be you know it seems to be
working out it's a great predictor of
general economic development it's
actually i think the best predictor of
the society's future economic
development is the attitude that they
hold towards the education of women and
luckily it's in the positive direction
and so that's very cool and then
it certainly seems to be the case that
the fastest way out of a given
environmental conundrum is to make
absolutely poor people richer as fast as
you possibly can
because then they do things like well
they don't burn wood anymore maybe they
burn coal and i know coal is evil but
it's not as evil as wood
and i don't know if you know this but
1.6 million children die
every year
because of the indoor pollution that
wood burning causes it's like if if the
nuclear industry had a
record like that that would be all over
the newspapers but they're just third
world children after all so you know the
planet has too many people on it anyways
and so
there's all sorts of things i see that
are so radically positive that it
beggars description i mean india and
china alone have greened an area in
because of agricultural transformation
the size of the amazon and partly as a
consequence of increased carbon dioxide
levels and semi-arid area
it's either the size of the amazon or
alaska i don't remember which has
greened in the last 15 years
and so these are things you never hear
you have to ferret them out but
as far as i can tell if we got our act
together and actually wanted it instead
of wanting to burn everything to the
ground in an orgy of guilt-ridden
self-destruction we could set up a world
in 15 years where
absolutely everyone had plenty to eat
and where obesity would be the primary
problem it's a good problem actually
it's like oh no you know we have too
much food what are we going to do that's
a good problem and where everyone was
educated because the cost of education
is falling precipitously and and we
could do that in a way that was actually
beneficial to the environment whatever
that is
so
so i would say fundamentally i'm
optimistic but if we want hell we could
certainly have that and you might say
well you don't want hell it's like yeah
really eh
you might want to ask your quest to
yourself that question real seriously
because
there's a party that
would
would wreak vengeance on god for the
catas catastrophic suffering of being
that's for sure
and that's
that's cain
right so no i'm optimistic because i
also don't believe that
our fundamental motivations
are that of a corrupt will
i think that's wrong i think it's wrong
factually
and i think it's
it's an appalling claim philosophically
and it's a
radically destructive claim ethically
demoralizing a terribly demoralizing
claim
and demoralizing enough to really hurt
people and i've seen many many people
maybe thousands of people
maybe tens of thousands of people hurt
by that claim hurt to the
deep recesses of their soul but i would
say like it depends depends on what you
choose to do
really depends on what you choose to do
you know i read once i think this was in
the solzhenitsyn novel although it might
not have been and it's certainly not his
idea it's an idea from one of the church
fathers that god is a circle whose
center is everywhere and whose
circumference is nowhere
nice mathematical model of god i like it
a lot but there's something about it
that's really true you know we we
interact with one another as if there's
a spark of the divine within us and you
say well no we don't it's like well if
you don't then no one likes you so you
know that'll be its own punishment
because we certainly do interact with
the people we value
when we're acting in a manner that we
regard as appropriate as if there is
something about them this of
transcendent and in some sense eternal
value
and you might say well you don't believe
that it's like well do you believe in
natural rights
because the notion of natural rights is
predicated on that underlying
presupposition or observation and you
don't believe in natural rights well
well then again where are you exactly
and who are you exactly
and those are questions very much worth
posing and so i think that truth is more
powerful than deceit by a large margin
and i think love is more powerful than
hate by a large margin i don't mean
naive love and i'm not naive about
people i don't mean that at all but i
think it is possible for us to rise
above the resentment of our suffering
and to wish the best for all things and
i think we can participate in that and
you do that
well by extending your hand to your
enemy to the degree you're capable of
doing that because who needs enemies or
maybe you do but it'd be better not to
have them i think even if they're
convenient targets to defeat
and then truth well that's the
handmaiden of love
and that's something everyone can
practice at every moment if they desire
that
and that's an adventure you know
if you're acting deceitfully you already
specify the outcomes of your actions and
you pursue that but the problem with
that is it's predicated on the
acceptance of your own
authoritarian completeness it's like
what the hell do you know about what you
should have
so what do you do instead you just
do your best to not lie and see what
happens
and what happens are wonderful things
although perhaps not at the beginning
when there's a lot of mystic claw
through so sorry for the lengthy answer
but it was a complicated question
does consciousness die with the body
and is meaning doomed like the universe
well i don't know
i would say i mean
we don't understand consciousness we
don't really understand its place in the
cosmos let's say but i'm not qualified
to answer such questions
i would say though that you know no one
stops listening to a symphony because
they know it's going to end
and so i think
in some sense our proper task is to find
the meaning within the finite when i had
clinical clients who were
consumed with such questions
because you know you can pick a time
frame of evaluation that makes all your
efforts futile right well the sun is
going to envelop the earth i i think
it's four billion years so like get
ready
it's like well what's the point of
stopping this baby from crying when the
sun is going to envelop the earth and
for well yeah you all laugh right but
but that laughter you see that's a sign
of wisdom
you know that's preposterous
why
i mean that's the existential question
right it's like well if all
if we're all doomed to ashes and decay
why do anything well i used the baby
crying
for a reason
i mean who in the world is going to use
that argument to not feed their baby
well why feed that thing in 4 million
years the sun's going to develop the
earth it's like wrong time frame folks
and so what i would say and i did say to
my clinical clients if you're adopting a
time frame that makes what you're doing
appear trivial
the problem isn't necessarily what
you're doing although it might be and
you have to ask yourself that question
because perhaps you are engaging in
something that's more trivial than you
should be the problem is that your
mind which is capable of leaping across
evaluative frameworks has picked a time
frame inappropriate for the task so quit
doing that
instead you could say well why don't you
practice adopting the time frame that
imbues your
properly oriented action with the
deepest possible apprehended meaning and
why would you not think that the fact
that that meaning manifests itself with
the proper choice of time frame why
wouldn't you accept the fact that's
indication of a valid choice it
certainly feels like it you know what
you know what it's like you get engaged
in something a deep conversation a piece
of music a piece of art something you
love doing someone you love being with
you get engaged in that you lose your
sense of temporality and you don't pop
out of it and think oh my god i wish i
would use the time frame that made
everything irrelevant because of my you
know cognitive brilliance you think hey
we could do that some more like how
about all the time
and that's that's a good goal it's like
yeah how about that all the time
and then you've got time right when
you're engaged like that and i would say
that's a profound neurophysiological
signal that you're in the right place at
the right time right because it's
accompanied by a sense of deep
well-being and that's literally an
antidote to suffering i mean that
literally it's
with many of my clients who were
suffering
what we would strive to do was not so
much
make them happy because sometimes that
was impossible they were so
crippled in in so many ways often
physically and in pain
but something meaningful
that would keep them going
and keep them from straying
and keep them from thinking
homicidal and genocidal thoughts all of
that
and meaning that's the antidote to
suffering and the question is well how's
that best to be found well that's an
empirical question you have to you have
to look in your own life and see where
meaning glimmers and then pursue that
right
that's what harry potter is doing by the
way when he's chasing the snitch
i just
thought i'd let you know
and
you know you win the game if you catch
that thing
well that's not exactly right you get
100 points but you know it'll do
so another question
how about you
hi thank you very much for the lecture
um you talked a lot about me you talked
a lot about meaning
both from perception and in music and
art
what do you
mean by meaning what is meaning and
where where is its source
meaning is implication for action or for
reorganization of the perceptual frames
that frame action
so there is
and is that is that the sole aim of what
you is that what you find in art and
music
yes in complex ways i mean in in music
you find this demand that the music lays
upon you to orient yourself in
relationship to this harmonious
interplay of patterns
and you might say well why is that
meaningful when that's a good question
well it's because you're acting out
something like
the adaptation of your
soul to the structures of reality itself
now it's done very abstractly because
the patterns of music are not precisely
the actual patterns of the world right
they're abstractions but it's play and
representation and it's art
and so you're acting out the process of
optimal adaptation at a very high level
when you think what people are doing
imagine a viennese waltz you know so you
have this unbelievably well trained
orchestra they're all emitting patterns
like mad and they're playing while
they're doing that putting little twists
on the pattern so that a little novel a
little interesting even if you've heard
the music many times you have the
conductor who's keeping all these
specialized sub-sections operating in
harmony and then you have the couples
dancing and they're trained to do that
but they're cutting the rug you know in
the same way they they have their moves
and they're trying to impress each other
and there's a mating aspect of that and
they're all doing that harmoniously and
it's a complete vision of a ordered
society right from the subatomic realm
let's say all the way up to the cosmic
realm that's all taking place in the
dance
and people don't know that but
well they do know it too you know and
they know it in that they're acting it
out
and there isn't anything in some sense
that you know more deeply or believe
more deeply than that which you act out
and you're not smart enough to
understand the full totality of your
actions
i mean we're not transparent to
ourselves we act out all sorts of things
that are stunningly
brilliant without realizing it and it
takes in some sense it takes often
untold centuries for us to figure out
what we were doing and why
and so that happens to you you know in
your own life when you have a flash of
insight into your own behavior
that's why i was doing that it's like
while you were doing it why didn't you
know
well
you're complicated
you're really complicated and certainly
not transparent to yourself
and so
i have a paper called three types of
meaning you could look that up if you
wanted a more like a more technical
answer but
the music
answer by example is a good one and i
think people can really relate to it
because
you know the only person you ever hears
who says well i don't really like music
is like no that's just a posture you
know you like music you just want to be
you know kind of interestingly different
and controversial and it's really
something right and it's also
interesting that music has this
non-propositional
structure that's completely opaque to
rational argumentation
said i i used to like to watch uh punk
rockers yeah especially the ones who did
mosh pit punk rock and you know
i went to a ramones concert once it was
quite comical i was on the second floor
ah so loud i couldn't like couldn't hear
for three days after this concert
because it was pretty little theater we
sat about 800 people and they had their
stadium speakers in there it was like
sonic wall of sound and we were above
this mosh pit and there's all these like
nihilistic punk rockers down there
smashing into each other and throwing
themselves off the stage and i thought
for all this talk of nihilism there you
are dancing to the harmonious patterns
of life it's like you know smash this
state and all of that it's like
that's that will groove to that yeah
it's very comical so even among the most
the most propositionally nihilistic
they still fall in love with music it
might be harsh and grating to some years
but you start where you can and you know
i like the ramone so that was fine with
me
so maybe yes
yes to brain damage yes and heaps and
heaps of neuroscience all seem to
suggest that we are merely that
consciousness is merely an app running
on a biological machine the the thing
that without being the decider really
the thing that john height calls the
elephant and the rider yeah and how does
this
uh my question is how does this grim
dark materialist view of existence
square with looking for meaning
imitating the divine yeah well i think
the i think the grim dark view
and the biologically deterministic view
is just wrong again and so consciousness
consciousness is not merely an
epiphenomenon of matter
and not that we know what that would
mean anyways like what the hell does
that mean it's something we don't
understand matter we might think we
understand it but
all you have to do is familiarize
yourself a little bit with quantum
theory to understand that you don't
understand matter at all it's like what
is that stuff and obviously
consciousness is implicit in it in some
sense because here it is and we're all
conscious and we have no idea how that
managed itself and then
the thing about but more more
specifically i would say you know when
darwin wrote his great tracks on
evolutionary theory he stressed two
elements of the selection process
natural selection
fair enough and you could you could make
a deterministic argument for natural
selection it's not easy because
nature is really complicated and the
idea that nature is selecting
that's from you know from a random array
of potential traits let's say although
i'm not convinced that that's entirely
random by the way but we won't get into
that
nature selects from this random array of
traits and i i think that capitalization
on randomness in that manner is
necessary to solve the complex process
problem of perception over a very long
span of time
but there's sexual selection
now it's a scandal in scientific history
as far as i'm concerned for almost 100
years after darwin published his great
works on sexual selection biologists
tended to pretty much ignore it it's
like yeah
no natural selection and that was
because i think it was easier to
maintain a strict determinism by
concentrating on natural selection the
tricky thing about sexual selection is
how is that not conscious choice
i mean what you don't make a conscious
choice when you sell well maybe you
don't if you've had enough alcohol but i
wouldn't i wouldn't you know recommend
that as a long-term mating strategy but
you tell me that
the conscious
choice of women specifically it's more
complex in the case of men because we're
we're an easier
what would you say we don't have as much
at stake and so we're not as choosy
women are exceptionally choosy and
certainly it's like a truism among
evolutionary biologists that part of the
reason that we had such rapid cortical
expansion is because of sexual selection
it's like how is that not the action of
consciousness on matter
and you might say well that's only been
operating since homo sapiens because
nothing was conscious before then it's
like
you ever see that bbc clip of the puffer
fish making the mandela
oh well you could look that up this
little puffer fish he's like this long
he's just a puffer fish
you know it doesn't have any hands which
is kind of hard if you hard problem if
you want to be a sculptor
he makes this sculpture that's like 20
feet across he's this big 20 feet across
at the bottom of the ocean and it's a
perfect circle and quite complexly
undulated and wavy it's not the sort of
mandela you would see in a great
cathedral but he's just a fish man it's
not so bad you know and he spends like a
week building this thing and it's so
funny watching him in the film because
he he goes down there and he like maybe
there's a stray piece of shell and he
grabs that he spits it out because no
shells in the damn sculpture it has to
be clean and then he he pops up and he
turns one eye like a bird and he looks
at it and then he goes down and waves a
little sand into place he's making these
dunes that are like a foot high and
there's like 400 of them and then you
see an aerial shot of it's this really
it's the size of this
stage and then the female puffer fish
comes along and you know checks it out
sees if he's got what it takes and if he
does the way they go it's like
it isn't obvious to me at all that that
puffer fish isn't conscious
and i would say you say while you're
anthropomorphizing it's like okay let's
have that discussion so i'm pretty
familiar with the animal experimental
literature and the greatest animal
experimentalists especially those that
study motivation and emotion so they're
the ones that are delving very deep into
the neurophysiological apparatus they're
basically rule of thumb is you
anthropomorphize except when there's a
reason not to
i think we share like
85 percent of our genes with yeast
it's like
rats
they're pretty complicated they play
they laugh you can tickle them they die
without love
you know puffer fish they make
sculptures
here's a story about spiders this is a
fun story if you like stories about
spiders
so there's these spiders and the female
won't mate with the male unless the male
offers her a gift and so he has to find
some dead fly or something that's
particularly delicious to a female then
wrap it really nicely in the web and
present it to her and if she likes it
and it's a good fly then maybe she'll
gain to mate with them but the damn
spiders it's so funny
some of them will wrap up dirt
present that it's like they tend not to
get away with it you know but sometimes
they do so that's pretty funny but
what's also funny is sometimes the
female will eat the fly and leave the
guy
you know
it is
in this agitated state let's say
it's like
you know those behaviors those are
complex man and it isn't obvious to me
at all that consciousness doesn't exist
way down the phylogenetic chain i mean
maybe it emerges in some form with a
differentiated nervous system we don't
know but
franz dewall who's a great primatologist
just wrote a book called like are we
smart enough to know how smart animals
are and the answer to that could well be
no i mean octopuses for example man
those things are smart and they can do
all sorts of things we can't do
you know they can
transform the texture of their surface
as well as the color to match an
underlying rock it's like they'll clamp
onto a rock and then poof they're
exactly like the rock it's like that's
hard
and and it's hard to imagine how
something like that is possible even
without the intermediation of something
like consciousness
and i can i cannot see at all how you
could be a biologist and believe in
sexual selection and think that only
random factors determine evolution it's
like
what about mate choice
well yeah no no no really
really
and you might say well that's not aiming
at some determinate end and that's
complicated
and
that's worthy of discussion but it's not
obvious to me at all that in the human
case it's not aiming at some idealized
end
i mean we certainly look for something
approximating an ideal in a mate
we want that and we want to encourage it
if we don't have it to begin with unless
we're you know bitter and resentful and
jealous
and so we are
pushing towards an ideal that's at least
implicit and it governs us at every
level of our
social interactions
and so i don't think that i don't think
that
it is
a dark reduction of consciousness to an
underlying
say ultimately real material state and
that's the final
answer i don't think that's true
and there's lots of people who aren't
foolish who don't think it's true it
isn't obvious to me that roger penrose
thinks it's true
you know and he's no lightweight
so he thinks consciousness is
irreducible in some sense
and i think the biblical idea that
consciousness calls forth shape from a
material substrate is there's something
to that and that's certainly not an idea
that's limited in religious texts
to the to the biblical stories in
genesis if you look at religious texts
all over the world there's always this
insistence that
there are two primal factors that work
one is the
matrix out of which things emerges and
another is something that calls forth
structure from that matrix
and it's a chicken and age egg problem
you know to use a terrible cliche but
it's an extraordinary widespread
fundamental theological idea
so
i think i have to stop i'm getting
messages from people that i'm doing my
best to ignore
so
thank you very much for the great
welcome and for
and for attending the talk tonight and
you have a wonderful
well jordan thank you so much uh for a
terrific exciting perceptive
talk i'm sure we could all have
discussed this all night long um but i'm
afraid we shall have to wrap up now so i
just want to say a few words i'm sorry
my name is araf ahmed i'm a professor of
philosophy in the university i just want
to say a couple of things um the first
thing is just to say very briefly this
event does does mark i hope the close of
a disgraceful chapter in the history of
this university
for too long we have labored under the
absurd idea
that
words are a form of oppression
or that speech is a way of perpetuating
harm when the opposite is true words are
instruments of liberation
and speech is an alternative
to harm and it was under those false
ideas as you will know
that
when jordan was invited
in early 2019
the university
cancelled that invitation not because of
anything he said not even because of
anything he thought but because of
somebody
he stood next to
some of us have been fighting back not
just because of that but because of the
creeping regulations on our speech and
not only in the university but
especially perhaps
in universities
things have been improving we've started
to win a few things
and so i was delighted when i heard in
this autumn that jordan will be coming
back
to cambridge and it represents something
of a victory
uh that he is speaking that he has been
speaking
here so as well as being obviously a
brilliant talk from which we've all
learned so much it represents as i say
an important victory not a final victory
because
when you fight for freedom of speech
it's never there's never a final victory
but an important victory in this battle
to get back this institution this
ancient institution which has played
such a great role in the history of this
country um and in freedom in this
country
now i want to thank
i want to have several thanks first of
all to all of you for making this such
an excellent occasion to those of you
who asked such brilliant questions and
in fact to all of you for coming even
even the lobster
and i want to thank uh stephen blackwood
david butterfield douglas headley those
of us who are who are involved in this
from the start and for whom this does
represent the culmination of
months and months of of work
and of course i want to thank the
speaker
for
visiting cambridge
for everything you've done so far we've
had some brilliant seminars we've had
this terrific talk the excellent talk
last night you've really uh you've
really brought so much excitement
to the university and really livened us
up here and we've had so much fun it's
been brilliant so we've got some
presents for you um
we have here
an
edition first edition of
a work by someone you mentioned tonight
which is darwin's descent of man this is
the first edition of that but as well as
mental food
you also need real food so in addition
we've got an enormous slab of meat
so thank you very much
[Music]
you